# What Does a Programmers Mindset Look Like?

> Writing is like driving at night in the fog. You can only see as far as your
> headlights, but you can make the whole trip that way. -- E.L. Doctrow

Most programmers start out all their code with this exact feeling - the fog of
ambiguity of wondering whether their solution will work, feeling a bit lost,
uncomfortable a lot of the time. What programmers have is a process that gives
them the confidence that, if they ruthlessly follow it, the fog will disappear,
the problems will wither, and the sunshine of success will break through.

This mindset is close to yoga, close to meditation, close to jazz, close to the
perfect golf swing, close to the clarity of falling in love, close to knowing
that you are THE ONE to save those trapped in the Matrix.

OK maybe we went too far there, but it's a feeling of perfect peace in a
realm of mindfulness.

## The Programmer's Mindset

### Mindfulness

_Mindfulness_ in programming, as with everything worth doing in life, is the
key. It just _happens_ that we're going to build that supporting skill by doing
programming. Most of the anti-patterns we discuss have lack-of-mindfulness at
their root: coding while texting, pairing while browsing Instagram, copying
random-dude420's solution from Stack Overflow. You're doing right when you're
doing _work_. When it's hard, when you'd rather do something mindless like
social media, you're doing the _right thing_. ***Don't stop.*** Be mindful.

### Bravery

Solving problems that no one has completed before, or that have stymied the
most brilliant humans ever to walk this earth is daunting. Who are _you_, who am
_I_, who are _we_ to dare such things?

The human kind.

The kind that descended the trees, harnessed fire, built civilizations in river valleys and put our
footprint on the Moon. All of these were hard problems that all the geniuses
and sages _before_ couldn't solve, until someone dared to try. Embrace
uncertainty, but also embrace your inner warrior. You are in a battle against
your own unknowing. You can win.

### Focus

We mentioned it under another name as "mindfulness" but while "Mindfulness"
recalls yoga poses and self-help books, it has a practical side we call
"focus." When you feel the distraction machines (phones, notification pings, a
morbid curiosity about whatever happened to nobody you really care about on
some reality show that society would be better off without) clawing at your
attention, realize that they are multi-_billion_ dollar industries that profit
from keeping your attention like an addict and selling it off by the half-hour.

The only thing keeping you from this fate is ***your will*** &mdash; which they
launch focused campaigns to weaken..

In general the idea is "don't get up until it's done." Now obviously this can
be a bad thing, sometimes you need food, sometimes a 10 minute walk will help
you think of a solution you might not have seen previously. But in general,
when you hit a bug, when you hit a problem, don't get up from the computer.
Stick with the problem until it's done. Don't "lose" your game face.

Another practice that will help you here is, before you start building, to
break down each component of the solution into a "deliverable." Make promises
to yourself that you'll go to dinner, you'll make that phone call, you'll waste
15 minutes on social media once that deliverable is working, tested, clean, and
saved.

## Don't Flail

Work from a problem solving process. Don't randomly add code and hope that this
next run will somehow magically get the answer. Make sure that each time you
run the code that you expect it to output some validation of your direction
toward the answer or the answer itself.

## Don't Curate the Internet's Solutions

Many of the challenges we give at FIS are standard problems that require very
little external pre-existing knowledge. As a result most programming languages
have built-in or readily copy-and-pasteable solutions. But **_this is not
programming_**. Learn from the solutions, see the part you're missing, update
your process. But if you simply use someone else's solution but don't enrich
your mental models you've made the poorest investment possible.

## Respect the problem

Lastly and perhaps the most important. Sometimes the problem seems simple and
when you delve in it's actually very complicated. Be honest with yourself, and
peers, bosses and collaborators and own up to having misjudged the size of the
problem.

Sometimes the problem's interconnected to other parts of the system in
surprising ways. Sometimes they's a hidden snarl of complicated code you
didn't expect to find. Perhaps the code depends on mathematics or business
knowledge you don't have that you need to learn more about.

Whatever the case, sometimes problems are hard and fool us. It's far
better to admit this and follow your process than to provide a fix while
choosing to be blind to complexity. That's how you get garbage solutions that
ultimately create more problems than progress.

## Conclusion

Think of each one of these steps as a practice - maybe copy / paste them into a
document and work on one each day until it's internalized. Once you operate
from this mindset on a continuous basis you'll notice that you're results
dramatically improve.
